feat(docs): build out client data fetching stub (#10516)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/docs/client-data-fetching.md

title: Client data fetching
---

Because a Gatsby site hydrates into a React app after loading statically, Gatsby is not just for static sites. You can fetch data dynamically on the client, as needed, as you would with any other React app.

> To illustrate this, we'll walk through a small example site that uses both Gatsby's data layer, and also fetches data on the client. This example is based loosely on Jason Lengstorf's [Gatsby with Apollo](https://github.com/jlengstorf/gatsby-with-apollo) example. We'll be fetching character data for Rick (of Rick and Morty) and a random pupper image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 To illustrate this, we'll walk through a small example site that uses both Gatsby's data layer at build-time and data on the client at run-time. This example is based loosely on Jason Lengstorf's [Gatsby with Apollo](https://github.com/jlengstorf/gatsby-with-apollo) example. We'll be fetching character data for Rick (of Rick and Morty) and a random pupper image.
```

```jsx:title=index.js
import React, { Component } from "react"
import { graphql } from "gatsby"
import axios from "axios" // highlight-line

// This query is executed at build time by Gatsby.
export const GatsbyQuery = graphql`
  {
    rickAndMorty {
      character(id: 1) {
        name
        image
      }
    }
  }
`

class ClientFetchingExample extends Component {
  // highlight-start
  state = {
    loading: false,
    error: false,
    pupper: {
      img: "",
      breed: "",
    },
  }
  // highlight-end

  // highlight-start
  componentDidMount() {
    this.fetchRicksPupper()
  }
  // highlight-end

  render() {
    const {
      rickAndMorty: { character },
    } = this.props.data

    const { img, breed } = this.state.pupper // highlight-line

    return (
      <div style={{ textAlign: "center", width: "600px", margin: "50px auto" }}>
        <h1>{character.name} With His Pupper</h1>
        <p>Rick & Morty API data loads at build time.</p>
        <p>Dog API data loads at run time.</p> // highlight-line
        <div>
          <img
            src={character.image}
            alt={character.name}
            style={{ width: 300 }}
          />
        </div>

>         // highlight-start

Reviewer: Nit, but this is invalid JSX. People sometimes (?) use these docs outside of gatsbyjs.org, so I like to keep these valid, e.g.

```suggestion
         {/* highlight-start */}
```

Author: Great point, that didn't occur to me at the time.

        <div>
          {this.state.loading ? (
            <p>Please hold, pupper incoming!</p>
          ) : img && breed ? (
            <>
              <h2>{`${breed} pupper!`}</h2>
              <img src={img} alt={`cute random `} style={{ maxWidth: 300 }} />
            </>
          ) : (
            <p>Oh noes, error fetching pupper :(</p>
          )}
        </div>

>       </div> // highlight-end

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       </div> {/* highlight-end */}
```

    )
  }

  // This data is fetched at run time on the client. // highlight-start
  fetchRicksPupper = () => {
    this.setState({ loading: true })

    axios
      .get(`https://dog.ceo/api/breeds/image/random`)
      .then(pupper => {
        const {
          data: { message: img },
        } = pupper
        const breed = img.split("/")[4]

        this.setState({
          loading: false,
          pupper: {
            ...this.state.pupper,
            img,
            breed,
          },
        })
      })
      .catch(error => {
        this.setState({ loading: false, error })
      })
  }
} // highlight-end

export default ClientFetchingExample
```

> That's it -- an example of querying for data at build time using the Gatsby layer, and dynamically requesting data on the client at run time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 That's it -- an example of querying for data at build time using the Gatsby GraphQL data layer and dynamically requesting data on the client at run time.
```
